It's 10:30 a.m.
and you've just arrived.
Coffee in hand for what you thought
was going to be a normal day at work.
As it turns out,
your company has just acquired
a work-in-progress iPad
title called Touch Fighter 2.
Looks like an interesting project,
only you've been tapped to give
the CEO a demo in just one hour.
No problem, you say.
You take a look at the
marketing collateral,
and this is what the game
is supposed to look like.
But when you launch it,
it looks like this.
Not quite right.
And what you thought was a splash
screen is actually the game
running at slideshow speeds.
You put down your coffee, launch Xcode,
and get to work.
So to get your game back in business,
we're going to tell you about
two tools that are already
available as part of Xcode 4:
OpenGL ES Performance Detective and
OpenGL ES Analyzer,
part of Instruments.
And for those of you who signed up
for WWDC 2011 in the first two hours,
we're going to throw in a free preview
of the tool we're working on now,
Xcode's OpenGL ES Debugger.
So the first tool I'll tell you about
is OpenGL ES Performance Detective.
And this tool basically looks at
the CPU and GPU activity for a
particular frame of rendering and
tells you why your frame rate is slow.
Unless that is that your frame rate
is slow for some non-graphics reason,
in which case we'll point you at other
tools to help diagnose your problem.
So this is the icon for
OpenGL ES Performance Detective,
in case you happen to cross it in Finder.
But we think you'll prefer to launch
it directly from within Xcode.
So this is the Scheme Editor.
If you go to the Product Edit Schemes
menu item and choose the Profile Scheme,
by default it will launch instruments
and ask you which instruments
template you want to load at launch.
Alternatively,
you can pick one of the specific
templates to load automatically,
or at the bottom of the list you'll
see OpenGL ES Performance Detective.
So that will allow you to launch it
directly by hitting Command-I or by
hitting Option-Run and choosing Profile.
Then you can launch your app in
your favorite profiling tool.
So we designed
OpenGL ES Performance Detective to
be extremely approachable to even
the most timid graphics developers.
Essentially,
if you know the name of your own app,
you're pre-qualified to use this tool.
And the first step is
to select your device.
So if you're the kind of
developer who has one of every
device attached to your Mac,
here's where you choose which
one you want to profile on.
Step two,
you need to find your app in the list.
Now, both of these steps actually go away
if you launch directly from Xcode,
where Xcode already knows
what your app is and which
device you're launching it on.
So that brings us to step three,
which is to trigger a frame.
So chances are you're not interested
in increasing the frame rate of
your splash screens or your menus,
so you're going to need to get past
all that to the meat of your rendering.
And at that point,
you take a look at the frames
per second meter we show you.
And when you find the place where you
think you have a performance issue,
you can hit the Collect Evidence button.
At this step,
you can set down your device,
have a couple sips of your coffee,
remind yourself why you love your job,
and just witness the magic.
At this point,
the tool has taken over your
device and is working its magic.
And finally, you reap the rewards as
OpenGL ES Performance Detective reveals
the outcome of its investigation.
So if you believe in magic,
you can just cover your ears
for the next few slides.
The rest of you will be interested to
know that the performance detective
is essentially just running the
same basic steps that an experienced
graphics developer would go through
to help isolate their own bottlenecks.
So here we have a visual
depiction of a graphics pipeline,
and what you do to isolate a
bottleneck is essentially stub out
different stages of the pipeline
and see if your frame rate peaks.
So here frame rate is
basically represented by water,
and we have actual pipes
representing the pipeline stages.
And so this is kind of
a normal configuration.
Here we see the pipes
have enlarged in size.
So if we were to stub out
the entire graphics pipeline,
effectively giving you an infinitely
fast OpenGL ES implementation,
and you notice that the frame
rate doesn't spike at all,
that's a clear indication that
your bottleneck is elsewhere.
earlier before the graphics pipeline.
If, however,
we go back to normal-sized pipes,
except for the fragment shader,
if we stub out the fragment shader,
essentially taking your many instruction
shader and collapsing it down to a
single fragment shader instruction,
and the frame rate does spike up,
there's a good chance we can
reasonably conclude that that's
where your performance bottleneck is.
So the way this works,
we capture a frame of
OpenGL ES rendering commands,
and that allows us to do apples-to-apples
comparisons as we play back these
commands with slight tweaks each time
to perform different experiments.
And so why this is interesting,
both to graphics novices
as well as graphics gurus,
is that it saves you time.
What might take you hours to do manually,
OpenGL ES Performance Detective can
do in less than a minute.
So I talked about triggering
the capture just by hitting
the collect evidence button,
but we have another way.
We have a programmatic approach
to triggering your captures.
It's an Apple debug marker extension,
new in iOS 5.
And this allows you to
trigger on whatever you like.
You could keep a frame
counter within your app and
trigger on a particular frame.
You could add code to your app to
detect the frame per second and trigger
on the drop in frames per second.
Loading a new level in your game,
the phase of the moon, whatever you want,
it's under your full control here.
So what sort of results might
you get out of this tool?
So performance detective might tell you
your frame rate's already good enough,
in which case we'll even go so
far as to say just considering
dialing up your graphics workload.
And really,
you've got to think about your job
not just as eliminating bottlenecks,
but balancing the overall
workload throughout the pipeline.
But don't just base your
decisions on how fast your iPad
2 or your iPhone 4 are running.
You may need to make different
decisions within your app in
order to achieve acceptable frame
rates on earlier iOS devices.
So the second kind of result
you might get is it might tell
you that your performance,
your frame rate isn't
where it needs to be,
but it's not OpenGL ES's fault.
It's not your usage of OpenGL ES that's
causing the frame rate degradation.
In this case, Performance Detective isn't
the tool for the job.
It's not the right tool,
but if you load up instruments,
it's got all kinds of built-in
tools to help you diagnose other
performance problems on the system.
And the third kind of
result you can get is that,
yes, your frame rate's not fast enough,
and it is your usage of
OpenGL ES that's the problem.
So in this case,
this is really what the tool is made for.
This is where it gets interesting.
We're going to tell you about
what we think your bottleneck is.
We're going to give you
some tips for resolving it.
And once you've internalized that,
once you've taken countermeasures in
your code to mitigate the bottleneck,
that's when you want to
come back into the tool,
rerun it, confirm that you've
fixed your bottleneck,
and see if another one has
popped up to take its place.
So at this point, I'd like to demonstrate
OpenGL ES Performance Detective and
see if we can't make some
progress on Touch Fighter 2.
Here we have the demo machine,
and I am launching
OpenGL ES Performance Detective down
here.
I'm going to zoom in
a little bit for you.
Open the new case.
We already have our device selected.
We have our app selected.
Go ahead
Click Open Case.
At this point,
it has launched on the device.
Take a look over there.
So you can see we're
running at low frame rate.
I'm going to switch back to
the demo machine where we're
going to trigger the capture.
It seems to be fluctuating around
the low 10 frames per second,
9 frames per second.
I'm going to click Collect Evidence.
And at this point,
the tool is working its magic.
So I'll switch back to the iPad so
you can see what that looks like.
Very simply, the performance detective
icon on the device.
This is your indication that you don't
need to do anything at this point.
The tool has quit your app for you.
And at this point,
the first thing it does is looks at
the CPU and GPU utilization to make
an initial determination whether
you're CPU-bound or GPU-bound.
It will capture a frame of your
OpenGL ES rendering commands.
And if it decides that you are GPU-bound,
at that point it starts
running all the experiments.
It's taking that frame's worth
of OpenGL ES rendering commands,
changing it,
slightly modifying each time,
running it back,
seeing how long it took to run it to
get a good feel for which stage is the
one that's your performance bottleneck.
I'm going to switch back
to the demo machine,
concluding the investigation.
Can take about a minute.
It depends on how complex your frame is.
Here we can see the outcome
of the investigation.
. So in this case,
it's telling us that we are
bottlenecked by our usage of OpenGL ES.
It's pointing the blame
at fragment shading.
So it's telling us in order to
reduce our fragment processing,
we may consider reducing the number of
instructions in our fragment shader.
We can do that by using a
simpler algorithm to try
to achieve the same effect,
hoisting some of the workload out of the
fragment shader into the vertex shader.
Or using lower precision
variables to store our data.
Instead of using high P in our shaders,
consider using medium P or low P.
So armed with this information,
I'm going to go into Xcode.
We're going to take a
look at our shaders.
And I see the first one on the list
is a tone mapping fragment shader,
so let's take a look at that.
Sure enough,
it is a giant shader doing a lot
of math to achieve what could
otherwise be a simpler effect.
So we're doing tone mapping to
get the colors that the artists
of the game were interested in.
And whichever developer was working on
this looks like they're halfway through
switching to a texture-based approach,
conveniently.
So in this case,
they're baking all of this
work into a 2D texture asset.
So let's go ahead and turn that on.
And there's one other place in
the code I need to turn it on.
I'm going to rebuild and
switch over to the device.
Let's take a look.
All right,
our frame rate is up around 40 frames,
close to 40 frames a second there.
So we have made progress.
Obviously, there's still many rendering
defects to deal with.
So let's move on to the next tool.
I'm going to switch back to slides.
The next tool I'd like to talk about
is OpenGL ES Analyzer for Instruments.
So whereas the last tool,
the Performance Detective,
required very little user
interaction from you,
you just point it at your app,
you point it at a frame of interest,
and it takes over and comes
back with an answer for you,
this tool you can dig a lot deeper into
the usage of OpenGL ES by your app.
So you may be -- if you're
familiar with instruments,
you're probably expecting that we
would have graphs on a timeline.
And yes, we have all that.
But the real power of the analyzer
instrument is that it's going to
look at your OpenGL ES command stream
and data mine it for inefficiencies
and misuses of OpenGL ES.
So one way to launch it is just
the OpenGL ES analysis template
when you start up instruments.
Otherwise, if you already have an
instrument session going,
you can just drag it from your library,
OpenGL ES Analyzer,
right onto your workspace.
Or finally,
like we did with Performance Detective,
you simply set it up as your
profile scheme target within Xcode.
So what do we have in our graphs?
By default,
we are going to show you a bunch
of different per-frame statistics.
So for each frame,
we'll tell you the number
of triangles rendered.
We'll tell you the number
of draw batches you had.
We're going to tell you the
total number of OpenGL ES and
Eagle calls in that frame.
And finally, an interesting one,
we're going to show you
the number of redundant
OpenGL ES commands in that frame.
So that's where you've set
OpenGL ES state to something
it was already set to,
essentially wasting your time.
And you can see that the
OpenGL ES driver instrument is also
loaded as part of this template.
And by default, that's going to show you
the frames per second.
So if you're running this tool,
you're probably curious where your
time is being spent on the CPU as
far as OpenGL ES is concerned.
So we provide you this
API statistics view,
which shows you all of the
OpenGL ES commands you're calling,
and it's showing you the number
of times you've called them
during this trace session.
It's going to tell you the average time
spent each time going into this call.
And then combine those two
together for a cumulative time,
the total CPU footprint
for each of these commands.
And so there's some things you
can expect to be near the top.
Present render buffer,
that's where we're copying
the final frame of rendering
to the compositing engine.
And then the gl draw elements
and gl draw arrays commands,
that's where we're taking all
of the previously set state,
finally getting around to processing it,
and kicking off work on the GPU.
So you can expect those
to be near the top.
But if you see something suspicious,
like just a random gl state setting
command near the top of the list,
chances are you're calling it
more frequently than you expect.
and you should look into that.
Another useful view is
this call tree view,
which is common to multiple instruments,
including the time profiler.
You may be familiar with this one.
And that's going to show you all the
different places you call each GL command
from to get a breakdown of where in
your app you're calling these things.
TraceView is a great one.
If you've got code throughout your
app all making OpenGL ES calls,
it may be hard to get a grip
on what all the calls are and
what order you're calling them.
So here in this view,
you can see them all
lined up and in order.
And to go along with that,
we have a frame navigator.
So this will essentially set the bounds
of the timeline filter to correspond
to a particular frame boundary.
And you can advance through these to
look at all the different ES commands
you're calling for each frame.
So on a frame-by-frame basis,
you can see what's different
in your call trace.
The other useful thing about
this is you may have completely
non-graphics-related instruments
loaded up in your workspace here.
And it's going to set the timeline
filter for all of them to correspond
to this frame of rendering.
So you can see what's going
on in other instruments
corresponding a particular frame.
So you say, Benj,
I love this OpenGL ES analyzer.
It's amazing.
But is there anything else it can do?
I'm glad you asked.
The expert view is by far my favorite.
I think it's the most useful.
It gives you a laundry list of all the
ways that your app is using OpenGL ES in
a way that's either incorrect,
according to the API,
or just suboptimal for our iOS platforms.
So it ranks them by severity.
You'll see the highest severity
items in red at the top of the list.
Every one of these is something
that you should fully investigate,
resolve, fix it in your code,
wipe it off this list.
You never want to have red.
The medium severity items in orange,
the vast majority of these are
legitimate issues that you're going
to want to investigate and understand.
Some of them you may be okay with.
They might be acceptable to you.
But you should really
look into all of these.
So how do you know what
to do when you see one?
Well, the little arrow next to each one,
you click on that,
it's going to open up the extended view.
And from there,
you can get more information about what
the issue was and tips to resolve it.
And we'll even show you the lines
in your OpenGL ES command trace
that we're blaming for the issue.
Maybe it's just one command
you call that's problematic.
Or maybe there's a sequence of
commands spread out over time.
We're going to highlight
all of them for you.
And each one of these,
you can look at the call stack,
link right back to your code
in Xcode to fix the problem.
So at this point, I'd like to hand it
over to Scott Bassett,
a colleague of mine,
who's going to demonstrate
this tool for you.
Hi.
I don't think this is working.
Good afternoon, everyone.
As Benj stated, I'm Scott Bassett,
and I'm now going to demonstrate
the OpenGL ES analyzers.
So let's get started.
Let me switch over to --
The app.
So when you first launch instruments,
a window appears and a sheet comes in
front of it that gives you a list of all
the instruments that you can choose from.
The OpenGL ES Analyzer
is under iOS graphics,
so let's go and select that now.
After selecting it,
you'll see it appear on the left-hand
side along with OpenGL ES driver,
which always gets loaded.
I'll point to it so everyone can see.
It's really easy to use our tool.
All you need to do is go up to the pop-up
menu where it says "Choose Target" and
Choose target again and
then choose your apps.
The apps are listed in alphabetical
order with the most recent at the top.
However, we only have one,
so let's just select that now.
Then all you need to do is
click the record button.
So it'll start the app.
I'll switch over to it
so you guys can see.
And it's basically where Benj left off.
However, the frame rate's a little bit
lower because the analyzer needs
to do some processing on the
device to manage the stream.
So we'll switch back to the
device now that you've seen that.
So after you've run your
app for a little while,
all you need to do is press stop.
And the analyzer takes
a little bit more time,
so it needs to spend more
time processing the functions.
You can see that down here.
It says estimated trace
analysts remaining.
And we have like 60,000.
It doesn't take too long, though,
so it should be pretty quick.
Okay, it's finished now.
As Benj stated, the best place to start
is in the expert view,
which takes up the bottom
right-hand side of this window.
Let me zoom in so you
guys can see it better.
So in this view, there's five columns.
The first is severity,
and there's two levels of severity.
There's red square and orange triangle.
Red square are really
important and should be taken
care of as soon as possible.
The next is total occurrences.
This is how many times it occurred
while the app was recording.
The next is unique occurrences.
This is how many different places in
the code that we found this issue.
And the final two are
category and summary,
which give you a basic
idea of what the error is.
Let's zoom out real quick.
A good thing to do is bring
up the extended detail view
on the right-hand side.
So I'll bring that up now.
All you need to do to do this is
go up to where it says view and
click the third button next to it.
This gives you a recommendation
and also the stack trace
of where to go in the code.
So let's look into the red
square issue right now.
So I'm going to click on Validation
Error and click on the arrow.
It's going to say we're calling
GL Active Texture GL False,
and that's not correct.
We can see up here it says in
the recommendation -- let me
zoom in real quick -- it says
GL Active Texture GL False,
Texture Unit Out of Range.
So that doesn't sound good.
And we can look down here
and see the stack trace.
By double-clicking on the stack trace,
it will bring it into
view in the main area.
And we can see the code that we have.
And right here we can
actually see GL texture,
active texture, GL false.
However, we can't edit in here.
But there is a good thing, though.
If you look up on the menu
for this source code viewer,
there's a little Xcode
button right up here.
It might be pretty hard
to see for everybody.
So if we click on that,
it'll bring us to the place in the code
where this issue is actually happening.
So we can see right here we're calling
GL active texture with GL false,
but it probably should
be like GL texture zero.
So let's just try that.
GL texture zero.
Okay,
so that should take care of that issue.
So let's switch back to Xcode
and look at another issue.
Or instruments, excuse me.
To go back to all the issues
that are happening in your app,
all you need to do is click on expert
and then click on it one more time.
Let's take a look at one of
these orange triangle issues.
While there's a lot listed here,
I've decided to look at recommend using
VBO because I've seen big performance
improvements by taking care of this one.
So if we look in on the right-hand
side in the extended detail view,
it says, your application sourced vertex
array data from client memory rather
than from a vertex buffer object.
In this situation,
every time GL draw arrays
or draw elements is called,
the data is retransmitted to the
graphics hardware to be rendered.
That doesn't sound good at all,
so let's zoom out real quick.
And let's click on the arrow
to continue further in.
And you can see there's many places
in the code where this is happening.
And we can actually see different stack
traces on the right-hand side over
here by clicking on different ones.
So let's take a look at one of these now.
So I decided to look at
this unsigned byte one.
It's most likely color.
And we can move to the
right-hand side and click on
Planet Render Object at Time.
And if we look at the code right here,
there's a -- fix me,
it says insert VBO code here.
I guess they didn't have time to do that.
And also there's a
vertex attriter pointer.
It's a normal one,
except at the end they're
passing in CPU data instead of,
like, using a vertex buffer object.
So let's change the code to do this now.
So, again,
we'll just click on the Xcode button
to go to the location in code.
And it's really easy to
use vertex buffer objects.
All we need to do is create the VBO.
And if we look up here,
this looks like -- let me see.
Wait a second.
This is the init function.
So this would be a good place to put it.
And there's actually a
fix me in here to do that.
I've created a code
snippet to do it already.
So let's just add it in here.
It's really easy to create a VBO.
All we need to do is call genbuffers
and then bind the buffer and then
just upload the data into this buffer.
That's all you need to do for that.
And then down below where we're
actually going to render the object,
I created another code snippet for that.
And if we look at the
difference between the two,
I'll just comment out this one so
it's easier to see the difference.
Basically all we need to do
is call bind buffer with the
buffer that we created before,
and then instead of
passing in the CPU data,
we'll just pass in an offset.
But since it needs to go in as a pointer,
we'll pass a null for this.
So now we've made these two changes.
So let's see what this did to
the app and see if we got any
improvement or fixed any issues.
So I'm going to run the app
and switch back to the app now.
Okay, so now look,
the ship's showing up properly,
it looks like, and we're getting around
55 frames per second,
which is a big jump from what we
were getting before around 40.
However,
there's still some weirdness happening,
like that planet just changed and
some things still don't look right.
So with that in mind,
I'm going to introduce Seth Sowerby,
who's going to go over our newest tool.
And thank you.
Hi, I'm Seth, and I'm a manager in the
GPU Developer Technologies Group.
Today I'm going to introduce you to
a revolutionary new way to debug your
OpenGL ES apps on iOS 5 visually,
all without leaving the comfort of Xcode.
The OpenGL ES debugger is a
brand new part of Xcode 4.2 that
allows you to capture a frame of
your app's OpenGL ES activity,
then step through the draw calls,
seeing how it builds your frame,
inspecting the state and
objects at any point.
Why would you want to do that?
Well, maybe you've got a rendering
defect and you want to quickly
hone in on where the issue is.
Or perhaps you want to get a better view
of your per-frame workload by looking
at all the draw calls that you're doing.
Sounds great, Seth, I hear you say.
Or at least think to yourself.
Where can I find it?
Well, the OpenGL ES debugger is
built right into Xcode 4.2.
Integral part of it.
Nothing extra to install,
nothing to enable, no switches to change.
Right there.
If you're an OpenGL ES app
running on an iOS 5 device,
you'll see this new
button on the debug bar.
Simply click that.
It will capture a frame
of your jail usage,
pause your application,
background it so it's safe,
and launch the debugger.
Alternatively, if you prefer,
you can add a breakpoint at any
point in your code and use the new
Capture OpenGL Frame breakpoint
action to capture wherever you want.
Or you can use the code marker
that Benj talked about earlier.
So the first thing you'll see once
Xcode has finished capturing your
frame is the main frame-buffer view
in place of the main Xcode editor.
In this, we show you the contents of
your currently attached frame
buffer at any call in your app.
And in this case,
you can see we also highlight the last
draw call as a lurid green wireframe,
so you can easily pick it out.
In this app, as you can see,
there's a color buffer and
a depth buffer attached.
And for depth buffer values,
we detect the range of depth
buffer values you use so that
we can map that to a gray scale,
and you can see in detail which area
of the depth range you're using.
The frame scrubber allows you to quickly
move back and forth through your frame,
quickly finding the draw call that's
drawing a particular rendering artifact
or some other part of your frame.
As you move to the left,
you move back to the start of your
frame where you're probably clearing
your buffers and rendering your skybox,
perhaps.
If you move all the way to the right,
you'll see your final frame ready
to present onto the device screen.
You can also navigate the
frame using the jump bar,
and it also gives you a handy description
of what exactly are the parameters
to that currently selected draw call.
In the debug navigator,
where you're used to seeing stacks
and queues from the CPU debugger,
we'll show you the full command
list of all the OpenGL commands
you're making within that frame.
And you'll see that we have different
icons for draw calls and for state calls.
So you can instantly quickly
see where you're doing draws,
where you're doing state calls,
and are you doing a ton of state calls,
and then one draw call,
and then a ton of state calls?
Quickly let you see that you may be doing
something that's not very performant.
Also,
if you disclose on any of the API calls,
you'll see that we give you a full stack
frame for that point in your frame.
So at any point where you
found a rendering defect,
disclose it, see the stack,
click on anything in the stack,
go back to your source
code and fix the issue.
You don't have to start
delving back to see,
okay, well, I know now it was a draw call
where something went wrong.
You can jump straight to it.
But a long list of draw
calls and state calls.
It's kind of flat.
It's kind of hard to see
what's going on in your app.
Really, there should be some better way
of kind of seeing what's going on.
So with that in mind, we introduced a new
OpenGL extension into iOS 5,
Apple Debug Marker.
This lets you use simple text markers to
annotate the hierarchy of your rendering.
So you can label when you're doing
your pre-pass or when you're doing
the lights at the end or when you're
drawing a structure or drawing cars,
whatever you want.
The choice is up to you.
It's you annotating your
code so that you can read it.
And see what's going on.
And you can nest these markers as deeply
as you want so you can reflect the
full complexity of your rendering loop.
To use the Apple Debug Marker?
Really simple.
Just call push_debug_marker before
the first call you wish to annotate,
passing the text label you want.
and Karl Popmarker when you're done.
Simple as that.
We support this new extension out of
the box with the GL Frame Debugger,
and we'll also be introducing it
to our other GL debugging tools.
In the debug area,
we've taken the variables view that
you've become familiar with for viewing
your autos and your variables and your
console log and all that type of stuff,
and we've extended it
to show your GL state.
So we have viewers for
your GL context state,
your bound GL object state,
and all the state for all the objects.
To make it easy to scan the great
wealth of GL state that there is,
we group these semantically.
So we put all the values that
are related to blending together,
all the values related
to depth test together,
so you can see what you want to see
related to each type of operation.
We also add summaries to these.
So you can just see that
if blending's turned off,
you don't need to see
all the blending values.
If blending is on, it will show you,
okay, blending and blending
this factor and that,
so you can quickly scan what's going on.
Similar to how the CPU debugger
will highlight variables that have
changed as you step through your code,
we'll show you state that has
changed since the last draw call.
So as you step through your frame,
you can see your state vector getting
updated from draw call to draw call.
If suddenly you're changing a state
value that you didn't expect to change,
you'll see it highlighted in blue.
Oh, I've turned my depth test off.
Why has that happened?
That's wrong.
Jump straight to the issue.
In the bound GL object view,
we'll show you, unsurprisingly,
the state for all your bound GL objects,
including such goodness as your
uniforms for programs or the
filtering levels on each texture,
everything there that you need to find.
In the Object View,
we show you all the objects that
are currently in your context.
Two options there.
You can have the BoundGL Object View,
which shows you just those
objects that are currently bound,
or the All Objects will let
you search through any of them.
And we also have filters there
where you can select whether to
view all of them or just by type,
such as texture or shader.
The Bound case is the one we
show by default because that's
really great for any draw call,
showing you which objects,
which textures, which programs you're
actually drawing with.
In the case of textures
and render buffers,
as you can see,
we'll show you a thumbnail
of their contents.
Makes it really easy to tell them apart.
It's not so easy to do with vertex
buffers and programs because,
you know, how do you thumbnail a vertex?
And it's kind of hard to tell GL objects
apart by name only when GL's concept
of a name is an unsigned integer.
Which leads us to the second new
extension we're introducing to
OpenGL in iOS 5 for debugging purposes:
Apple Debug Label.
This lets you attach a simple text
label to any GL object you've created.
It makes it quickly -- you can quickly,
easily look and see, oh,
that's texture2.pvr, or this is the mesh
for my castle vertices,
or whatever.
Again, the choice of how you
label them is down to you.
To label your objects,
simply once you've created your object,
just call label object.
Just pass in what the
type of the object is,
the name,
and the text you wish to label it with.
There's also an API for
querying these labels back.
So if you want to use it for building
your own login code within your app
or some offline tool that you have,
you can do that, too.
If you double-click on
any of these objects,
you'll get a detailed view
so you can hone in on seeing
exactly what's in there.
And, yeah, we provide the functionality
you need to view them in detail.
So if it's textures, you can select the
MIP level or the cube face.
If it's a program or shader,
you can check the compile info log.
So you can see all you need
to figure out what's going on.
For vertex array objects,
we even unpack all the vertex data
from the vertex arrays and element
buffers and array buffers that are
attached to the VAO to provide you with
a list of vertices as your currently
bound vertex program will see them.
So you can see exactly what data
it's going to be operating on.
Because we build all these object
viewers on top of the existing
assistance editors within Xcode,
you can configure them to suit your
workload and have multiple windows open.
So you can have one, in this case,
we show you bound GL objects.
And we also, in this case,
showing you another new assistant
we've brought in specifically to make
use of this variability in that you
can have one that shows you the source
code at the point you're calling GL.
So you can just step through your
code or step through the draw
calls or API calls in your frame,
seeing the buffers update,
seeing the bound objects update,
and seeing exactly where you are
in your code at that same point.
As soon as you spot an issue,
you're right there.
Just jump to your code and fix it.
Okay, at this point,
I'd like to invite Filip Iliescu
to come forward and demonstrate the
OpenGL ES debugger as he fixes the
final few issues in TouchFighter 2.
Thanks, Seth.
All right,
T-minus 20 minutes to executive demo,
and I'm really excited.
So I'm going to show you guys our
new OpenGL ES debugger with NX code
4.2 by fixing some of the issues
that we still see in Touch Fighter.
Switching over to Xcode here.
I'm going to start out by looking
at what we believe to be the
correct rendering that we're
expecting out of Touch Fighter.
And then I'll go ahead and compile
and launch Touch Fighter on this iPad.
We can see what it's
actually rendering like.
Okay, yeah, yeah, it looks pretty broken.
I can still see some issues here
going on with that mothership.
There's something wrong
with the geometry.
And the fighters are actually
flying behind the planet,
the background.
That's kind of weird.
The planet actually
looks completely broken.
Looks like there's --
the texture's wrong,
and there's some kind
of big ring around it.
When I was expecting a glow.
So I'll go ahead and take
a capture of this guy.
And switch back to Xcode here.
Now, since I can basically see all the
rendering defects while the game
is running in idle and I don't
really have to interact with it,
I'm going to go ahead and use this
capture button right here that
shows up if your app is linking
to OpenGL ES to trigger a capture.
And while this is capturing,
I just want to note that you can also
use breakpoint actions or you could
actually use the new API that Seth and
Benj mentioned in their slides to
trigger a capture programmatically.
So this is going to take a
second to kind of grab the
frame and all of the API calls,
and once it's done,
it'll show up in Xcode's
main editor here.
And the first thing you'll see is the
frame that you actually were capturing.
Okay.
Well, here we go.
So first off,
I just want to note that this
is the main render buffer here,
the main color render buffer.
And you can actually see what
buffers you have enabled.
You can show color depth or stencil.
Or my favorite is to just set it on
auto because if you set it on auto,
then it will just show you
the current attachments that
you have on the current FBO,
the current draw FBO.
And right above that is
Xcode's editor jump bar,
which will always show you the
current trace location for all
of the objects and state and
everything that you're inspecting.
Over on the left,
we have the GL frame navigator.
And this might be a little hard to see,
but I'll zoom in on it for you guys.
And essentially,
this gives you the complete
list of all of your API calls
in the order that you made them.
You can further disclose that to
actually get a backtrace to your code.
Now, you can also see these folders
that we've set up here.
And the way you set these
up is really simple.
You just use the new GL Push pot marker
API that Seth mentioned in his slides.
You can further open up one of
these markers and you get the
complete list of API calls that
you surrounded using those markers.
Down below, we have the debug area,
Xcode's debug area,
which we've added our state inspector.
And the state that you're seeing here
is based on the current trace selection,
which you can always note, once again,
by just looking at the jump bar
and the API item in the jump bar.
This is the state at that
point in the API trace.
And over on the right,
we have Xcode's assistant editor, which,
essentially, if it's not open,
you can always trigger the show
assistant editor button here to open it.
And we have three different categories
here that you can choose from:
bound GL objects, all GL objects,
and the stack.
Now, the stack is kind of nice.
What I'm going to do is actually go
ahead and open up a new assistant
down below and select stack.
Now, the nice thing about this is it
will show you the -- it will show
you the GL API exactly at the
point where you're inspecting.
So if, for example,
you want to actually -- if you're
going through this and you're
selecting various points in the API,
it will actually show you
where you made that GL call.
If you want to actually show
something in the debug navigator
to see where it falls in the order,
you can right-click on the main editor
and click reveal in debug navigator,
and it will open up over
here in the debug navigator,
further disclose and get a stack frame.
Great.
Well, I have this set up now,
exactly how I would go about debugging.
So let's get started.
First off, I want to look at what's going
on with this mother ship.
It's kind of interesting.
The geometry doesn't look right.
According to my picture that I had,
it looks a lot different.
So I think I'm just going to go ahead
and figure out how it's being drawn by
dragging the knob of the slider here,
the scrubber,
to show every -- to show the
rendering -- intermediate rendering
calls that leads up to that.
Now, I'm going backwards,
and while I'm getting there,
I just want to note one thing here.
Two things, actually.
The first thing is you'll
notice this green wireframe,
and that basically tells you
what the geometry is that you're
currently rendering with that draw
elements call or what have you.
You can always right-click to
hide or reveal the wireframe at
any point if it's not showing,
for example.
So the other thing I want to note
is that you actually can see all
of the intermediate rendering
happening on the device itself.
So there's our mothership.
Great.
I think I'll just stop there.
And then I'll switch back over to Xcode.
And then I'm going to right-click
to reveal in the debug navigator,
I have this big mothership group here.
Okay.
Well, I'm actually kind of not seeing
anything right off the bat.
Maybe if I go to the very
first draw where they actually
started drawing this mothership,
I can see something interesting.
Well, the first thing that pops up is
in the state viewer down below,
anything that's highlighted with
blue is any new state that's been
set up for this particular API call.
So, okay, that's interesting.
I have a depth buffer
and depth reads enabled.
And I actually don't see a depth buffer,
and I can tell right away because
I've got it set to auto and
all I see is a color buffer.
Okay, well,
I can also disclose further on the
bound frame buffer and notice that
there's no depth attachment in it either.
Well, that kind of tells me that
maybe I've not set up my depth
attachment correctly or something.
So I think the first thing I'm
going to do is just go over into
Xcode's project-wide search and
just search for GL depth attachment.
And see if I've actually set that guy up.
Or set it up wrong.
Oh, it does show up in my search.
Oh yeah, look at that.
It's commented out with a big fix me.
Looks like somebody thought
they might need one,
but they didn't actually set it up.
Okay, well,
let's go ahead and recompile this.
And see if that fixed anything.
I'll go ahead and switch
back over to the iPad.
See if anything's fixed here.
I'm actually --
I'm actually fairly certain
that that fixed... Oh yeah,
yeah, the mothership looks good now.
But did it fix anything else?
Let's see, the fighters are still
flying behind the planet,
the texture's still busted.
All right,
let's go ahead and switch back over to
Xcode and grab another capture of this.
See if we can figure out what's going
on with the rest of these defects.
So while you're capturing,
you can notice there's this area over
here that tells you what's going on.
So you always know that
the capture is going.
And look at that, we have a depth buffer.
Yeah, that's kind of what I thought.
You can always just view the color if
you want or just -- or select both.
But let's just keep it on auto.
And that should give us what we need.
Okay.
Well,
Let's take a look at this planet.
I'm going to go ahead and put this back
on stack because I really like that.
I think it's incredibly useful.
Always seeing the top of
the stack for each call.
And I'm going to go ahead and
just move over to this planet
group that I've created.
And I guess I'll further disclose that
because I'm actually getting the ring.
I'm more interested -- let's see,
this is the first draw call,
so I'm guessing -- yep,
that's the planet I'm looking for.
Great.
If I go ahead and --
Zoom in on the state area.
Well, notice I have active
texture unit one set,
and I've got two texture
units in my bound GL objects.
Yet, if I look at the bound resources,
The Texture Unit 1 is the one that I'm
actually interested in drawing with,
so that looks correct.
Although I am using OpenGL ES 2.0,
which means I've probably got some shader
going on that's doing my rendering.
Let's take a look at the fragment shader.
It looks like I've got -- I'm
sampling with this uniform here.
Well, okay.
If I click and disclose the program,
In BoundGL Objects,
I can actually view the values
of each of those uniforms.
And yeah, it looks like I've got -- I'm
sampling from texture unit zero.
Well, that's not the texture I want.
Interesting.
Okay, well,
where in my trace here am I actually
setting active texture unit one?
Oh, it looks like, yeah,
right about there.
Yeah, there it is.
Shows up right in the top of the stack.
Well, somebody put a fix me
there and didn't fix it.
All right,
so let's just set texture zero.
And while I'm here, I'm going to go over
to the next draw call,
which is that ring that was
appearing around the planet,
and take a look at that.
Now, I can see immediately in
my state area right here,
and I'll zoom in,
that somebody enabled blending.
Okay.
So that kind of makes sense,
although why is it set to zero?
That's kind of weird.
I would expect that if I'm trying
to blend with the background,
I should be using something
like 1-source-alpha.
So where do I actually set
that in my draw list here?
Oh, yeah, there's the blend funk.
And it looks like, yeah, there it is.
Somebody set it to zero.
And, of course, put a big fix me,
like they thought that was the, you know,
the right thing to do but didn't fix it.
Great.
Well,
I'm going to go ahead and recompile this
and run it again and see how it looks.
And I'll switch back over to the iPad.
Yeah, yeah,
it looks like the planet's fixed,
and we've got this nice glow
around the planet and everything,
the way it's supposed to look, but, yeah,
those spaceships are still
flying behind the planets.
Something's really wrong there.
All right.
Well, I'll go ahead and try and trigger a
capture when I have some spaceships in
the vicinity that I'm interested in.
There we go.
That should do it.
Great.
And see how those get drawn.
Well, once again, I've set up my group,
so it's pretty easy.
I can just click on it.
It'll take me to the last
draw call in that group.
There's the planet.
Okay.
Well, I can step through the draw calls,
you know, by using the steppers here.
Going draw call by draw call.
And there's the mothership being drawn.
Or I can use the scrubber.
Yeah, I know that.
But I've also set up
these really nice groups.
So why don't I just skip to the
last draw call on the mothership.
That'll speed things up a little bit.
And I can click on the enemies.
Okay.
So there they are.
They're drawing in front of the planet.
And there's -- what's going on here?
Oh.
Looks like somebody's
drawn the planet twice.
After they've drawn everything.
Okay.
Well, that's kind of interesting.
Should be able to just see -- yeah,
there's the push/pop marker groups,
and there's a big fix me, of course.
Shouldn't we render the
planet before other objects?
Well, yeah.
Okay.
Great.
I'm just going to go ahead and
comment that out since we're already
rendering it somewhere and recompile.
See how it looks.
Okay.
Well, yeah, of course, that fixed it.
Great.
Well, yeah, our frame rate's locked
at 60 frames per second,
and I wonder if that, you know,
probably improved a little bit by
removing the redundant draw as well.
Awesome.
Well, that does it.
I'm going to hand this back
over to Seth to wrap up for us.
Thanks, Phil.
So, the demo's saved, the CEO's happy.
Time to crack open that
magnum of champagne.
If there are just three things we can
leave in your head from this session,
they're these.
One, these tools exist.
The Performance Detective for
helping you quickly find
your performance bottlenecks.
The Analyzer Instrument for giving
you the laundry list of your
OpenGL ES misuses and inefficiencies.
And the new OpenGL ES Debugger for
helping you dive into your rendering code
and fix things quickly and efficiently.
Two, where to find these.
Simple.
Xcode 4.
The Frame Debugger is
built right into Xcode 4.2.
And you can launch the other
two tools directly from Xcode.
Just hit Command-I and off you go.
Thirdly, please use these tools.
They do you no good
if you don't use them.
And don't wait until something's broken.
The analyzer instrument is great
for just running it occasionally,
seeing if there's stuff broken
that you don't know about.
Fix your bugs before you
see what's going wrong.
For more information,
a couple of dev evangelists
you can contact.
Alan Schaffer,
who's a graphics and imaging evangelist,
and Mike Jurowicz,
who's the dev tools evangelist.
Just want to mention a couple
more great sessions coming up.
Right after this session,
there's Best Practices
for OpenGL ES Apps in iOS,
which gives you some great info
on making the best use of GL and
getting the best out of the devices.
And tomorrow's a great session,
Adventures in OpenGL for MacOSX, Lion,
where you'll find out what some of
the great new things we're introducing
to OpenGL on the desktop in Lion.